There are four fundamental stages, or processes, in the creation of any C program:

  * editing;
  * compiling;
  * linking;
  * executing;

**editing** -- process of creating and modifying source code

compiling
---------

The compiler converts your source code into machine language and detects and reports errors in the compilation process.

The output from the compiler is known as object code and is stored in files called
object files, which usually have names with the extension .obj in the Microsoft Windows environment, or .o in the Linux/UNIX environment.

You can compile like this:

```c
gcc -c myprog.c
```

if you omit the `-c` flag, your program will automatically be linked as well.

linking
-------

The linker combines the various modules generated by the compiler from source code files,
adds required code modules from program libraries supplied as part of C,
and welds everything into an executable whole.

Program libraries support and extend the C language by providing routines to carry out operations that aren’t part of the language. For example, libraries contain
routines that support operations such as performing input and output, calculating
a square root, comparing two character strings, or
obtaining date and time information.

executing
---------

The execution stage is where you run your program, having completed all the previous processes successfully.

```c
/* */ -- comment in C
```

to simply link object files do:

```c
gcc -o output file1.o file2.o
```

If you want to link your files to an executable do:

```c
gcc -o output file1.c file2.c
```
```c
printf("If at first you don\'t succeed, try, try, try again!");
```

The `\'` sequence in the middle of the text to be displayed is called
an escape sequence.

```c
#include <stdio.h> /* This is a preprocessor directive */
```

The symbol `#` indicates this is a preprocessing directive, which is an
instruction to your compiler to do something before compiling the source code.

The compiler handles these directives during an initial preprocessing phase before
the compilation process starts.

In this case, the compiler is instructed to “include” in your program the contents
 of the file with the name stdio.h. This file is called a header file, because
it’s usually included at the head of a program.

All header files in C have file names with the extension `.h`

Note: Although the header file names are not case sensitive, it’s common practice to write them in #include directives in lowercase letters.

```c
return 0; /* This returns control to the operating system */
```

This is a return statement that ends execution of the main() function and returns
that value 0 to the operating system.

You return a zero value from `main()` to indicate that the program terminated
normally;

Every C program consists of one or more functions, and every C program must contain
a function called `main()` — the reason being that a program
will always start execution from the beginning of this function.

a string of characters between double quotes is called a string
literal.

note: As with all executable statements in C (as opposed to defining or directive
statements) the `printf()` line
must have a semicolon at the end.

You can use the `\a` escape sequence in an output string to sound a beep to signal something interesting or important.

```c
/* Program 1.6 A Simple C Program – Important */
#include <stdio.h>
int main(void)
{
  printf("\nBe careful!!\a");
  return 0;
}
```

Note: to make it work we should do the following:

```
sudo modprobe pcspkr
```

to remove beep:

```
sudo modprobe -r pcspkr
```
```
\t -- Represents a horizontal tab
\v -- Represents a vertical tab
\r -- Represents a carriage return
\b -- Represents a backspace:
just moves pointer to "print head"
```
for example:

```c
printf("hello worl\b\bd\n");
```

The output is

```
hello wodl
```

`\\` Inserts a backslash (`\`)

Interesting Fact:
```c
printf("\n\t\t\b\b\b\b\b\b\b\bAnd how this look when it prints out?\n\n");
```

`\b` doesn't move pointer back on one space in this example
